Exploratory data analysis is an important
part of any data analysis process.
This lecture discusses the goals
of EDA and what to expect from it.
Some of the key questions that you
wanna think about before engaging in
an exploratory data analysis process,
are basically,
do you have the right data to answer
the question that you’re interested in?
And then, do you need to get other data,
if you don’t have the right data,
to answer your question?
And then finally, given what you see from
the data, and given kinda what you make
of everything that’s going on in there,
do you have the right question?
Cuz it could be that, maybe,
you thought you had the right question.
And you thought you had
the right data set, but
when looking around in the data set and
exploring what's in there,
you realize that maybe the question
is better asked a different way.
Or maybe you need to just slightly refine
the question, make it more specific, or
maybe focus on specific variables.
So the goal of EDA is to get
a chance to look at the data,
see if you've got the right data,
do you need to get more?
And do you need to refine
your question at all?
In this lecture,
we're gonna talk about whether you have
the right data to answer your question.
And then,
another goal of exploratory data analysis,
assuming you pass that first part,
is to think about how can you develop
a sketch of kinda what the answer
to your question might be.
So the idea, so one of the end products
of exploratory data analysis is to really
get a sense of whether
the solution is out,
whether the solution exists,
and what it might look at.
And then from there, if you wanna
continue, you might go onto something more
like formal modeling which
we'll talk about later.
So this lecture we'll talk about figuring
our whether you've got the right data for
the job.
Now, I assume you've already
formulated your question, but
it's good here to always double check to
make sure that it's as sharp as it can be.
So that you can kind of reduce the number
of variables or the kind of fact
features that you might want to look at,
before you kind of go ahead, okay?
Now the first thing you want to do, of
course, is you have to read in the data.
You can't do an exploratory data
analysis without reading in the data.
But, assuming you can do that,
the thing that I like to do is
what I call check the packaging.
Imagine you've got some box, and
there's something inside you wanna get at.
And you can't get at it yet, and so you
kinda shake it around, maybe measure it.
You know, see how big it is.
Is it bigger than a bread box?
And see what kind noises does
it make when you shake it.
Things like that.
So that's kind of what you're trying
to do with your data set here.
Your data set is the thing that's inside
the box but you want to make sure,
kind of see what's, everything's
kind of the right shape and size.
So some of the things
that I like to check are,
do you have the right number of rows and
columns?
If the way that you got this data said
that you were expecting there to be 1,000
rows, then there should be 1,000
rows in the table for example.
If there are gonna be 60 features,
there should be 60 columns, for example,
in a table.
So just make sure you got
those dimensions right.
Basic details about
the packaging of a data set.
If you were told that certain variables
were gonna be included in the data set,
just check to see that they are in
fact included in the data set, right?
It's a very simple check.
You don't have to look at
any data to figure that out.
You just basically have
to look at the metadata,
things like the variable names and
the number of rows, for example.
And then if there's any other
metadata that you might need,
things like codebooks, things that
describe what the variables are,
make sure that comes with the data too,
okay.
So this could all be done without
actually looking at any numbers yet.
Now, the next thing I like to do is
to check the edges of the data set.
And so for example, if you're looking
at a table, I like to check the top and
the bottom.
Okay, so just look at the first few rows
and then maybe look at the last few rows.
So the first few rows are helpful just to
make sure you've got the right numbers
there, the kind of things
you were expecting to see.
I find it's very useful to look at
the last few rows just to make sure, for
example, that the data
set is read in properly,
that you've got all of the data
that you were expecting to get.
Often in data files, there's some
junk at the end, some comments maybe,
just some notes that someone put in there,
especially if they were exported
from an Excel spreadsheet.
So you usually don't want to
read that kind of stuff in, so
looking at the bottom of the data set can,
so to speak,
can kind of help you to see if
there's any of that junk down there.
And you want to check to see is
the data formatted correctly?
Does it look like the right numbers
are in the right columns and
the right numbers are in the right rows?
Sometimes those things can
be shifted by one or two.
So you wanna make sure you've got
everything kinda correct there.
If you've got data, for example with
dates, often looking at the top and
the bottom can be useful because
if they're sorted by date,
you can see if the range is correct.
You know, if the earliest and
latest dates are correct.
And so that's another thing
that you might wanna check for.
And so, just looking at the very edges of
the data set can be very useful to flag
a number of basic problems that can very
often occur and are usually easy to fix.
But once you kind of get
into a data analysis,
if you discover these things later, it can
be a real pain in the neck to deal with.
So the next item that I always try to
think about when I'm looking at a new data
set, I'm just getting involved in
a data analysis is what I call ABC,
always be checking your Ns, okay?
So every aspect of your data set is
gonna have some kind of count or
number associated with it.
For example, there's gonna be
a total number of observations, or
your sample size.
Is that what you expect it to be?
Are you expecting a certain
number of columns?
There's going to be a number of columns,
you should always check that end.
But then also within the data set,
there's going to be a certain
numbers that you expect.
For example,
if you have a number of subjects,
you wanna count the number of subjects or
units in your analysis.
If every subject was measured three times,
you wanna make sure that every subjects
got actually three measurements
associated with it, right?
So there's all kinds of just ends that
you can check within your data set and
kind of around your data set to
make sure that everything is kind
of in structured in place, okay?
So, the next thing you wanna do is
actually just look at your data.
And to me,
the easiest way to look at the data to
determine if there are any
problems is to make a plot.
So making a plot is useful in two ways.
The first way it's useful is for setting
expectations about your data, okay?
So when you look at a plot,
you get a sense of kinda how the variables
are related to each other
if you make a scatter plot.
Now if you make a box plot,
you can look at the distributions of the
variables to see whether they're skewed.
Are there positive and negative values,
are you expecting positive and
negative values, things like that?
So plots can very quickly reveal this
kind of information in a way that often,
tables cannot.
Because one of the things
that plots give you
is they give you a summary
plus a deviation.
And very often,
tables will only give you the summary.
So for example,
they give you the mean or the median.
But a plot will allow you to
visualize both the mean and
the deviations from the mean.
And so you'll be able to see if there
are very large deviations that are perhaps
unexpected.
Or there are kind of values that, for
example, negative values or maybe they're
positive values that you weren't
expecting that don't appear correct.
All right, so
I think a plot is very important to make.
Not that there is no role for
tables in data analysis, but a plot has
a unique ability, in my opinion,
to show you both what to expect and
what not to expect in the sense of what
the deviations are from that expectation.
So look at the data and make a plot.
The next useful thing that I like
to do with data sets is to try to
validate it with at least
one external data source.
So obviously how you do this will
depend on exactly what your problem is,
what your question is and
the data that you have at hand.
But it's nice to be able to check
certain aspects of your data set,
that they match something outside.
So that you know that the data you got
are at least kinda within the realm of
reality.
And even just a single
number can be useful.
So, for example, if you know that
the average level of some feature
In your population is, on the order
of plus or minus whatever, ten.
And if you look in your data set, and you
have a measurement on that same feature,
and it looks like
the average is around ten.
Well that can be useful just so
you know that roughly the mean of your,
the distribution in your data set,
is corresponds to kind of what you
might expect in the population.
Another thing you can do is
to look at some measurements
that you have in your data set.
And compare it with measurements that are
similar, if not exactly the same feature,
but things that you would
expect to be correlated with
what’s there in your data set.
And check to see if they’re
actually correlated, right?
So that way, you can get a sense of,
okay well, whatever I’m measuring in my
data set, it’s measuring the same thing
that this other metric is looking at,
and so
there may be some kinda validity there.
So just doing a little check to see that
your data matches with something that's
kind of independent and
outside your data set.
Can give you a little bit more confidence
in the idea that your data set
is properly formatted and
it came to you in the right way.
So now that you've checked the packaging,
you've checked your ends,
you looked at the top and
the bottom of the data set.
You've made maybe a simple plot just
to kind of visualize the data, and
you've validated with one
external data source.
The next thing to do is to try
to take a stab at your solution.
And I won't get into
that very much right now,
but my only point to make here is that
you should try the easy solution first.
Okay, what is the most obvious
thing that you would do
in the kind of simplest of scenarios,
right?
So, cuz you wanna be able to
start with something simple and
then you can kind of get more
complex a little bit later.
But often the simplest thing
can be very revealing.
That's the key, and
often the more sophisticated approaches
will give you a little bit more insight.
But not any more than you would have
gotten from just looking at a very simple
picture or a table or whatever it is
that you've tried to do it first.
And the goal of this is really to start
developing what I call a primary model.
So a primary model is
the model of which you kind of
base your other analysis around, right?
And it's not gonna be permanent.
You may change what
the primary model is later.
But it's the kinda focal point,
your initial focal point for
your analysis, and then you'll
try all kinds of other analyses.
Secondary analyses that I call them,
that will try to test whether your
primary analysis is appropriate or not.
And many times you'll find that actually
your primary analysis was not right and
you'll focus on a different model and
you make that your primary model.
But sometimes your primary
model will hold up and
then you'll be able to stick with it.
But it doesn't matter, at first, kind of
what you choose, you want to be able to
say craft the solution and
then kind of hang on to it for a moment.
And try to do some secondary
analyses around it to see
if your initial solution holds up.
So the idea is that you wanna build, if
you're kinda making a case for something,
you wanna build some prima facie evidence.
And so that prima facie evidence
is really this initial solution,
is the simplest solution that
you can think of at the moment.
And then you try to pick away
at it to see if it falls apart.
But one of the endpoints of exploratory
data analysis is to develop this prima
facie case to develop this primary model.
So once you've gone through this process,
you've looked at the data,
you've checked to see that everything's
valid, you wanna be able to follow up.
Okay, so this is the point where you ask
yourself those three questions that we
talked about in the beginning.
Do you have the right data?
Do you need to get other data, right?
So do you need to collect more?
Do you need to ask for more?
In order to answer.
And do you have the right question, or
does it need to be refined a little bit?
So once you're here,
you may need to slightly
revise a few things with your data and
with your question.
But once you've done that, if you wanna
move on, then you can start using
exploratory data analysis techniques
to kinda refine your primary model, and
then move on later into
a more formal model.